notes.md, before:

# msvc++ and cmake and vscode

## Configuring `vs code`
- Useful extensions:
    - `C/C++` (by microsoft): intellisense, debugger, code browsing
    - `Python` (by microsoft)
    - `cmake-tools`: include path determination from cmake files, debugger configurations
    - `cmake` (by twxs): syntax highlighting and command completion
    - `cmake format`: auto indentation
    - `GitLens`
    - `Graphviz Preview`: preview `.dot` file including those created by boost test.

- To use `cmder` add the following to `%AppData%\Roaming\Code\User\settings.json` (the file edited when selecting `[File|Preferences|Settings]`).:
    ```json
    {
        "terminal.integrated.shell.windows": "cmd.exe",
        "terminal.integrated.env.windows": {
        "CMDER_ROOT": "<path to cmder>/cmder"
        },
        "terminal.integrated.shellArgs.windows": [
        "/k <path to cmder>/cmder/vendor/init.bat"
        ],
    }
    ```
- To improve clarity of the tree view:
    ```json
    "workbench.tree.indent": 16,
    ```

## Configuring `Graphviz Preview`
- Install [Graphviz](https://graphviz.gitlab.io/_pages/Download/Download_windows.html)
- Configure the path in the user wide `settings.json`:
    ```json
    "graphvizPreview.dotPath": "C:/Program Files (x86)/Graphviz2.38/bin/dot.exe",
    ```

## Configuring `cmake-tools`

- The compiler/linker are specified via the active `cmake-tools` "kit".  MSVC compilers are discovered with the help of `vswhere` (bundled).

- By default `cmake-tools` selects `Ninja` as the generator. To override add the settings `<path to project>/.vscode/settings.json`:
    ```json
    "C_Cpp.default.configurationProvider": "vector-of-bool.cmake-tools",
    
    "cmake.generator" : "Visual Studio 15 2017 Win64",
    "cmake.configureOnOpen": false,
    ```
  (of course only the second setting is directly relevant to forcing the generator).

- To install ninja (as admin):
    ```cmd
    $ choco install ninja
    ```

## Configuring `clang-format`

- Install llvm.

- Set as formatter:

    ```json
    "[cpp]": {
      "editor.defaultFormatter": "xaver.clang-format",
    },
    "clang-format.executable": "<path to LLVM>/bin/clang-format.exe",
    "editor.formatOnSave": true,
    "editor.formatOnType": true
    ```

- Format is taken from the first file with the name `_clang_format` or `.clang_format` encountered searching through the parent directories.

- Useful hints can be obtained with:
    - `clang-format.exe -dump-config -style=<style-of-interest>`
    - [this interactive webpage](https://clangformat.com/)

- Complete settings are described in the [documentation](https://releases.llvm.org/8.0.0/tools/clang/docs/ClangFormatStyleOptions.html)

- For Visual Studio 2015 it is necessary to first install [the extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=LLVMExtensions.ClangFormat) and then run the repair tool (`[add remove programs/VS2015/Repair]`) to get the  menu items to appear.


## Configuring the `vscode` C++ extension

- Force intellisense by disabling fallback to the tag parser:
    ```json
    "C_Cpp.intelliSenseEngine" : "Default",
    "C_Cpp.intelliSenseEngineFallback": "Disabled",
    ```

## Configuring the `CMake` project

### Setting Options with `cmake-tools`

- Add the option names and their settings to `<path to project>/.vscode/settings.json`:
    ```json
    {
        ...
        "cmake.configureSettings": {
        "USE_LIB_A" : "ON"
        },
        ...
    }
    ```

### Setting the Build Directory with `cmake-tools`

- Add:
    ```json
    {
        ...
        "cmake.buildDirectory": "${workspaceRoot}/<relative bin path>",
        ...
    }
    ```
    *n.b. that ${workspaceRoot} is the parent of the `/.vscode` folder*

## Configuring the CPP project

### Shared libs

- By default symbols in a shared library are not available on windows (requiring `declspec`).  Set:
    ```
    CMAKE_WINDOWS_EXPORT_ALL_SYMBOLS=ON
    ```
    or equivalently in the `settings.json`:
    ```json
    {
        "cmake.configureSettings": {
        ...
        "CMAKE_WINDOWS_EXPORT_ALL_SYMBOLS" : "ON",
        ...
        },
    }
    ```

## Configuring Debuggers with command line options

- For targets not requiring command line arguments `cmake-tools` provides a graphical configuration.

- For command line arguments a good starting point for `.vscode/launch.json` is:

    ```json
    {
        "version": "0.2.0",
        "configurations":
        [
            {
                "name": "Test Runner Launch",
                "type": "cppvsdbg",
                "request": "launch",
                "program": "${workspaceFolder}/<path to test runner>/test_runner.exe",
                "args": [
                    "--color_output=1",
                    "--log_level=all",
                    "--run_test=<filter>",
                ],
                "stopAtEntry": false,
                "cwd": "${workspaceFolder}",
                "environment": [],
                "logging": {
                    "moduleLoad": false
                },
                "externalConsole": false,
            }
        ]
    }
    ```
    *note disabling of moduleLoad logging*


## Incremental Builds

### `vswhere.exe`


## Code Formating

### Installing `clang-format`


### Settings configuration
      

## IDE Usage

- A useful `cmake-tools` command is: 
    ```
    CMake: Delete cached build settings and reconfigure
    ```
- If command line arguments are not required it is not necessary to use `tasks.json` to configure the debugging.
- The core functionality (build and debug) can be triggered from the bar at the bottom of the application.  
- Build and Debug are buttons which start the activity the configuration (i.e. the targets) are shown as dropdown's to the right of their buttons.  



## Appendix

### Defining cmake options

#### bool options

- Define: 
    ```cmake
    option(USE_LIB_A "use lib a" OFF)
    ```

- Use:
    ```cmake
    if(USE_LIB_A)
        add_subdirectory(lib_a)
    endif(USE_LIB_A)
    ```

#### Defining dropdown options

- Define: 
    ```cmake
    set(c_sub_lib_name "one" CACHE STRING "sub lib used by lib c")
    set_property(CACHE c_sub_lib_name
                PROPERTY STRINGS ${LIB_ONE_NAME} ${LIB_TWO_NAME})
    ```

- Use:
    ```cmake
    if(${c_sub_lib_name} STREQUAL ${LIB_ONE_NAME})
        message(STATUS "Using lib one")
        add_subdirectory(sub_lib_one)
    elseif(${c_sub_lib_name} STREQUAL ${LIB_TWO_NAME})
        message(STATUS "Using lib two")
        add_subdirectory(sub_lib_two)
    else()
        message(STATUS "No lib found")
    endif(${c_sub_lib_name} STREQUAL ${LIB_ONE_NAME})
    ```

### Creating a binary directory

- There are a few ways to get a folder containing all exectuables and dll's.  
    - Lots of post build `copy-directory` commands
    - Lots of setting of the `runtime_output_directory` properties of the targets (provides fine grained control)
    - Setting the variable which is used to initialise target properties:
        ```cmake
        set(CMAKE_RUNTIME_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY ${PROJECT_BINARY_DIR}/bin)
        ```
        `PROJECT_BINARY_DIR` is the build directory.
        

### An example lib/app cmake skeleton

- File Structure

```
C:\USERS\COLINRAWLINGS\DESKTOP\TEST_CMAKE_TOOLS
│   .gitignore
│   CMakeLists.txt
│
├───app
│   │   CMakeLists.txt
│   │
│   └───src
│           main.cpp
│
├───lib_a
│   │   CMakeLists.txt
│   │
│   ├───include
│   │       a_lib.h
│   │
│   └───src
│           a_lib.cpp
```

- Top level `CMakeLists.txt`
    ```cmake
        project(test_cmake_tools)
        add_subdirectory(lib_a)
        add_subdirectory(app)
    ```
    - Define `lib_a` first since it will be needed by `àpp`

- `lib_a`'s `CMakeLists.txt`
    ```cmake
    add_library(lib_a)

    target_sources(lib_a PRIVATE 
        ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/src/a_lib.cpp
        ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/include/a_lib.h)

    target_include_directories(lib_a PUBLIC 
        ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/include)
    ```
    - Mark the header files which will be used externally with `PUBLIC`.
    - Use absolute paths to files
    - Do not use legacy `cmake` commands like `include_directories()`: 
      <https://github.com/vector-of-bool/vscode-cmake-tools/issues/481#issuecomment-406787695>

- `app`'s `CMakeLists.txt`
    ```cmake
    add_executable(main)

    target_sources(main PRIVATE 
        ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/src/main.cpp)

    target_link_libraries(main lib_a)
    ```
    - Do not redefine the include directories of `lib_a`.
    - Including the header files in `target_sources()` can help IDE's
    - The arguments for `target_sources()` will typically only be non-private in the case of header only libraries (public headers are defined via `PUBLIC` entries in `target_include_directories()`)
    - To use `lib_a` in `main.cpp`:
        ```cpp
        #include <a_lib.h>
        ```

### CMake Projects with boost

- Build boost (see project help).
    - [download .7z archive](https://www.boost.org/) and extract with 7zip (much faster).
    - run: `<path to boost>/bootstrap.bat`
    - run the build: 
        ```bash
        b2.exe --with-filesystem --with-test --with-regex --with-chrono toolset=msvc-14.1 address-model=64 architecture=x86 link=shared threading=multi
        ```
        *n.b. the suprising omission of hyphens when specifying the properties.  This omission is also present in the output from `b2.exe --help`.  With the hyphens (e.g. `--link=shared`) the settings appeared to be ignored.*

- Declare settings used during the boost build in the cmake file.:
    ```cmake
    set(Boost_USE_MULTITHREADED ON)
    set(Boost_USE_STATIC_LIBS OFF)
    ```

- Find the library by defining an appropriate `BOOST_DIR`
    ```cmake
    set(BOOST_INCLUDEDIR ${BOOST_DIR})
    set(BOOST_LIBRARYDIR ${BOOST_DIR}/stage/lib)
    find_package(Boost COMPONENTS system filesystem REQUIRED)
    ```

- Use:
    ```cmake
    target_link_libraries(main Boost::system Boost::filesystem)
    ```
    If this doesn't work ("missing find_package() call").  Fall back to:
    ```cmake
    target_link_libraries(lib_a ${Boost_LIBRARIES})
    target_include_directories(lib_a PRIVATE ${Boost_INCLUDE_DIRS})
    ```

- For dynamic linking:
    ```cmake
    target_compile_definitions(my_lib PUBLIC BOOST_ALL_DYN_LINK)
    ```

- To run the libraries need to be copied to the bin folder:
    ```cmake
    add_custom_command(TARGET main POST_BUILD
                     COMMAND ${CMAKE_COMMAND} -E copy_directory ${BOOST_LIBRARYDIR}
                     $<TARGET_FILE_DIR:main>)
    ```

Commit message:

Add comments on avoiding warnings about missing CRT headers

notes.md, after:

# msvc++ and cmake and vscode

## Configuring `vs code`
- Useful extensions:
    - `C/C++` (by microsoft): intellisense, debugger, code browsing
    - `Python` (by microsoft)
    - `cmake-tools`: include path determination from cmake files, debugger configurations
    - `cmake` (by twxs): syntax highlighting and command completion
    - `cmake format`: auto indentation
    - `GitLens`
    - `Graphviz Preview`: preview `.dot` file including those created by boost test.

- To use `cmder` add the following to `%AppData%\Roaming\Code\User\settings.json` (the file edited when selecting `[File|Preferences|Settings]`).:
    ```json
    {
        "terminal.integrated.shell.windows": "cmd.exe",
        "terminal.integrated.env.windows": {
        "CMDER_ROOT": "<path to cmder>/cmder"
        },
        "terminal.integrated.shellArgs.windows": [
        "/k <path to cmder>/cmder/vendor/init.bat"
        ],
    }
    ```
- To improve clarity of the tree view:
    ```json
    "workbench.tree.indent": 16,
    ```

## Configuring the Visual Studio Tool Chain

- Using the VS2015 installer 
  - install: `Programming Languages/Visual C++`
  - install: `Windows and Web Development/Universal Windows App Development Tools/Windows 10 SDK`
    - *This is more subtle. Compiling etc. works without it but `Intellisense` complains about missing CRT headers (e.g. `corecrt.h`) and then disables the on-the-fly static checking ("red error squiggles").*

## Configuring `Graphviz Preview`
- Install [Graphviz](https://graphviz.gitlab.io/_pages/Download/Download_windows.html)
- Configure the path in the user wide `settings.json`:
    ```json
    "graphvizPreview.dotPath": "C:/Program Files (x86)/Graphviz2.38/bin/dot.exe",
    ```

## Configuring `cmake-tools`

- The compiler/linker are specified via the active `cmake-tools` "kit".  MSVC compilers are discovered with the help of `vswhere` (bundled).

- By default `cmake-tools` selects `Ninja` as the generator. To override add the settings `<path to project>/.vscode/settings.json`:
    ```json
    "C_Cpp.default.configurationProvider": "vector-of-bool.cmake-tools",
    
    "cmake.generator" : "Visual Studio 15 2017 Win64",
    "cmake.configureOnOpen": false,
    ```
  (of course only the second setting is directly relevant to forcing the generator).

- To install ninja (as admin):
    ```cmd
    $ choco install ninja
    ```

## Configuring `clang-format`

- Install llvm.

- Set as formatter:

    ```json
    "[cpp]": {
      "editor.defaultFormatter": "xaver.clang-format",
    },
    "clang-format.executable": "<path to LLVM>/bin/clang-format.exe",
    "editor.formatOnSave": true,
    "editor.formatOnType": true
    ```

- Format is taken from the first file with the name `_clang_format` or `.clang_format` encountered searching through the parent directories.

- Useful hints can be obtained with:
    - `clang-format.exe -dump-config -style=<style-of-interest>`
    - [this interactive webpage](https://clangformat.com/)

- Complete settings are described in the [documentation](https://releases.llvm.org/8.0.0/tools/clang/docs/ClangFormatStyleOptions.html)

- For Visual Studio 2015 it is necessary to first install [the extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=LLVMExtensions.ClangFormat) and then run the repair tool (`[add remove programs/VS2015/Repair]`) to get the  menu items to appear.


## Configuring the `vscode` C++ extension

- Force intellisense by disabling fallback to the tag parser:
    ```json
    "C_Cpp.intelliSenseEngine" : "Default",
    "C_Cpp.intelliSenseEngineFallback": "Disabled",
    ```

## Configuring the `CMake` project

### Setting Options with `cmake-tools`

- Add the option names and their settings to `<path to project>/.vscode/settings.json`:
    ```json
    {
        ...
        "cmake.configureSettings": {
        "USE_LIB_A" : "ON"
        },
        ...
    }
    ```

### Setting the Build Directory with `cmake-tools`

- Add:
    ```json
    {
        ...
        "cmake.buildDirectory": "${workspaceRoot}/<relative bin path>",
        ...
    }
    ```
    *n.b. that ${workspaceRoot} is the parent of the `/.vscode` folder*

## Configuring the CPP project

### Shared libs

- By default symbols in a shared library are not available on windows (requiring `declspec`).  Set:
    ```
    CMAKE_WINDOWS_EXPORT_ALL_SYMBOLS=ON
    ```
    or equivalently in the `settings.json`:
    ```json
    {
        "cmake.configureSettings": {
        ...
        "CMAKE_WINDOWS_EXPORT_ALL_SYMBOLS" : "ON",
        ...
        },
    }
    ```

## Configuring Debuggers with command line options

- For targets not requiring command line arguments `cmake-tools` provides a graphical configuration.

- For command line arguments a good starting point for `.vscode/launch.json` is:

    ```json
    {
        "version": "0.2.0",
        "configurations":
        [
            {
                "name": "Test Runner Launch",
                "type": "cppvsdbg",
                "request": "launch",
                "program": "${workspaceFolder}/<path to test runner>/test_runner.exe",
                "args": [
                    "--color_output=1",
                    "--log_level=all",
                    "--run_test=<filter>",
                ],
                "stopAtEntry": false,
                "cwd": "${workspaceFolder}",
                "environment": [],
                "logging": {
                    "moduleLoad": false
                },
                "externalConsole": false,
            }
        ]
    }
    ```
    *note disabling of moduleLoad logging*


## Incremental Builds

### `vswhere.exe`


## Code Formating

### Installing `clang-format`


### Settings configuration
      

## IDE Usage

- A useful `cmake-tools` command is: 
    ```
    CMake: Delete cached build settings and reconfigure
    ```
- If command line arguments are not required it is not necessary to use `tasks.json` to configure the debugging.
- The core functionality (build and debug) can be triggered from the bar at the bottom of the application.  
- Build and Debug are buttons which start the activity the configuration (i.e. the targets) are shown as dropdown's to the right of their buttons.  



## Appendix

### Defining cmake options

#### bool options

- Define: 
    ```cmake
    option(USE_LIB_A "use lib a" OFF)
    ```

- Use:
    ```cmake
    if(USE_LIB_A)
        add_subdirectory(lib_a)
    endif(USE_LIB_A)
    ```

#### Defining dropdown options

- Define: 
    ```cmake
    set(c_sub_lib_name "one" CACHE STRING "sub lib used by lib c")
    set_property(CACHE c_sub_lib_name
                PROPERTY STRINGS ${LIB_ONE_NAME} ${LIB_TWO_NAME})
    ```

- Use:
    ```cmake
    if(${c_sub_lib_name} STREQUAL ${LIB_ONE_NAME})
        message(STATUS "Using lib one")
        add_subdirectory(sub_lib_one)
    elseif(${c_sub_lib_name} STREQUAL ${LIB_TWO_NAME})
        message(STATUS "Using lib two")
        add_subdirectory(sub_lib_two)
    else()
        message(STATUS "No lib found")
    endif(${c_sub_lib_name} STREQUAL ${LIB_ONE_NAME})
    ```

### Creating a binary directory

- There are a few ways to get a folder containing all exectuables and dll's.  
    - Lots of post build `copy-directory` commands
    - Lots of setting of the `runtime_output_directory` properties of the targets (provides fine grained control)
    - Setting the variable which is used to initialise target properties:
        ```cmake
        set(CMAKE_RUNTIME_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY ${PROJECT_BINARY_DIR}/bin)
        ```
        `PROJECT_BINARY_DIR` is the build directory.
        

### An example lib/app cmake skeleton

- File Structure

```
C:\USERS\COLINRAWLINGS\DESKTOP\TEST_CMAKE_TOOLS
│   .gitignore
│   CMakeLists.txt
│
├───app
│   │   CMakeLists.txt
│   │
│   └───src
│           main.cpp
│
├───lib_a
│   │   CMakeLists.txt
│   │
│   ├───include
│   │       a_lib.h
│   │
│   └───src
│           a_lib.cpp
```

- Top level `CMakeLists.txt`
    ```cmake
        project(test_cmake_tools)
        add_subdirectory(lib_a)
        add_subdirectory(app)
    ```
    - Define `lib_a` first since it will be needed by `àpp`

- `lib_a`'s `CMakeLists.txt`
    ```cmake
    add_library(lib_a)

    target_sources(lib_a PRIVATE 
        ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/src/a_lib.cpp
        ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/include/a_lib.h)

    target_include_directories(lib_a PUBLIC 
        ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/include)
    ```
    - Mark the header files which will be used externally with `PUBLIC`.
    - Use absolute paths to files
    - Do not use legacy `cmake` commands like `include_directories()`: 
      <https://github.com/vector-of-bool/vscode-cmake-tools/issues/481#issuecomment-406787695>

- `app`'s `CMakeLists.txt`
    ```cmake
    add_executable(main)

    target_sources(main PRIVATE 
        ${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}/src/main.cpp)

    target_link_libraries(main lib_a)
    ```
    - Do not redefine the include directories of `lib_a`.
    - Including the header files in `target_sources()` can help IDE's
    - The arguments for `target_sources()` will typically only be non-private in the case of header only libraries (public headers are defined via `PUBLIC` entries in `target_include_directories()`)
    - To use `lib_a` in `main.cpp`:
        ```cpp
        #include <a_lib.h>
        ```

### CMake Projects with boost

- Build boost (see project help).
    - [download .7z archive](https://www.boost.org/) and extract with 7zip (much faster).
    - run: `<path to boost>/bootstrap.bat`
    - run the build: 
        ```bash
        b2.exe --with-filesystem --with-test --with-regex --with-chrono toolset=msvc-14.1 address-model=64 architecture=x86 link=shared threading=multi
        ```
        *n.b. the suprising omission of hyphens when specifying the properties.  This omission is also present in the output from `b2.exe --help`.  With the hyphens (e.g. `--link=shared`) the settings appeared to be ignored.*

- Declare settings used during the boost build in the cmake file.:
    ```cmake
    set(Boost_USE_MULTITHREADED ON)
    set(Boost_USE_STATIC_LIBS OFF)
    ```

- Find the library by defining an appropriate `BOOST_DIR`
    ```cmake
    set(BOOST_INCLUDEDIR ${BOOST_DIR})
    set(BOOST_LIBRARYDIR ${BOOST_DIR}/stage/lib)
    find_package(Boost COMPONENTS system filesystem REQUIRED)
    ```

- Use:
    ```cmake
    target_link_libraries(main Boost::system Boost::filesystem)
    ```
    If this doesn't work ("missing find_package() call").  Fall back to:
    ```cmake
    target_link_libraries(lib_a ${Boost_LIBRARIES})
    target_include_directories(lib_a PRIVATE ${Boost_INCLUDE_DIRS})
    ```

- For dynamic linking:
    ```cmake
    target_compile_definitions(my_lib PUBLIC BOOST_ALL_DYN_LINK)
    ```

- To run the libraries need to be copied to the bin folder:
    ```cmake
    add_custom_command(TARGET main POST_BUILD
                     COMMAND ${CMAKE_COMMAND} -E copy_directory ${BOOST_LIBRARYDIR}
                     $<TARGET_FILE_DIR:main>)
    ```
